Add some questions on type synonyms, datatypes and polymorphism (#7)
haskellfoundation/certification-syllabi: questions/andres.md

- Type declarations and type aliases
- Algebraic data types (ADTs)
- Parametric polymorphism

# Type declarations and type aliases

General ideas:

- partial application of type synonyms
- correct datatype for a specific task
- transformation between two isomorphic types
- number of distinct implementations of a given type
- infer most general type

# Type declarations and type aliases

> Q: What is the problem with the following code? Describe two

Reviewer: Can you be more specific than the word "problem"?  At first read I wasn't sure whether "problem" meant compiler error or something else.

> Q: What is the problem with the following code? Describe two

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
Q: The following type declaration fails to compile and produces an error. 
What is the reason for the failure? 
Describe two
```

I'm inclined to agree.

different methods in which the problem can be addressed:
```
type WithExplanation a = (Explanation, a)

class HasPayload f where
  getPayload :: f a -> a 

instance HasPayload WithExplanation where
  getPayload (_explanation, a) = a
```

A: Type synonyms cannot be partially applied, so the
`instance` declaration is rejected.

Method 1: Eta-reduce the type synonym:
```

> type WithExplanation = (,) Explanation

Reviewer: I'm slightly conflicted about `(,) Explanation` here.  I tend to think that this adds accidental complexity to the question.  I would say that `(Explanation, a)` is one of the most basic things that everyone should know.  But `(,) Explanation` seems like a meaningful step function up.  Now I do think that it's still not a very advanced concept and I'd want people I hire to know it, but I feel like maybe it distracts from the core concepts that the question is getting at.  Not sure though.  What do other people think?

```

Method 2: Generalise the `instance` declaration:
```
instance HasPayload ((,) e) where
  ...
```

> Method 3: Define a `newtype` or `data` instead:

Reviewer: I think this is the only method I'd expect a basic track person to know about.

```
data WithExplanation a = WithExplanation Explanation a

instance HasPayload WithExplanation where
  getPayload (WithExplanation _explanation a) = a
```

> 

Reviewer 2: I'm a HUGE fan of these solution answers!

R: Test knowledge about the limitations of type synonyms.
Potentially tests knowledge of prefix tuple application syntax,
and partial application of tuples.

---

> Q: What is the problem with the following code?

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
Q: The following code fails to compile and produces an error.
Identify the error.
```

Describe two different methods in which
this code can be fixed?
```
type Ints = (Int, Maybe Ints)
```

> A: Type synonyms must not be recursive.

Reviewer: This feels like a bit of a trick question to me and overly focused on small details.  I actually can't remember ever writing a recursive type synonym even once in my whole Haskell experience!  And then as soon as you put this in your code, GHC tells you `Cycle in type synonym declarations`.  So it doesn't seem like NOT knowing this bit of trivia would really be all that much of a tangible problem to an employer.  The first time you stumble on the issue, you immediately will know what the issue is.

Method 1: Use a proper type instead, in this case a non-empty
list.
```

> type Ints = NonEmpty Int

Reviewer: I wouldn't expect knowledge of `NonEmpty` in the basic track.

```

Method 2: Use a `newtype` or `data` instead:
```
data Ints = Ints Int (Maybe Ints)
```

R: Test knowledge about the limitations of type synonyms.
Potentially tests whether the intended equivalence with
non-empty lists is being recognised.

# Algebraic data types (ADTs)

Q: How many (total) values are there of the following types?
```
Maybe ()
Either Bool Bool

> [Void]

Reviewer: Love this question.  I feel like `[Void]` is a bit tricky because I didn't learn about `Void` for a long time, and even today I wasn't sure whether `Void` had 0 or 1 inhabitants without refreshing my memory.

Reviewer: One more case that I think could be useful is something like `Either Bool (Maybe Bool)`.

```

A: In order:
```
2
4
1
```

> R: Tests reasoning capabilities about the "algebra" of datatypes.

Reviewer: Love this as a thing that we should test.  The `TwoOrThree` example below is not bad, but I wonder if we could make it a little more practical.  Just this week I was trying to explain the difference between `Maybe` and null pointers to some Rust devs at work.  I wonder if we can come up with a simple example using `Maybe` that is more directly applicable to real world development.

> ---

Reviewer 2: Would be nice with a bit of "show your working" as well.

Good question!

Q: Define a datatype that captures the concept that you want to have exactly two or
exactly three occurrences of some value of a type `a` precisely.

A:
```
data TwoOrThree a =
    Two a a
  | Three a a a
```

Another options:
```
data TwoOrThree a =
    TwoOrThree a a (Maybe a)
```

R: Tests if one can use `data` syntax. Test if one can model simple concepts as
a datatype precisely.

---

Q: A user can be identified by a phone number, an email address or both.
Define a datatype that captures this information precisely. (You can assume
suitable datatypes for phone numbers and email addresses exist.)

A:
```

> data IdentificationMethod =

Reviewer: Maybe we could ask something about the difference between this data structure and two Maybes.

    OnlyPhone PhoneNumber
  | OnlyEmail EmailAddress
  | PhoneAndEmail PhoneNumber EmailAddress
```
(Another option is to use the `these` package, and the `These` type, which should
probably be fine.)

R: Tests if one can use `data` syntax. Test if one can model simple concepts as
a datatype precisely.

# Parametric polymorphism

Q: How many different total functions are there of type `Either a a` -> `Either a a`?
(And give their implementations. If you think there are too many different functions,
explain why.)

A: 4.
```
f1 (Left a)  = Left a
f1 (Right a) = Left a

f2 (Left a)  = Left a
f2 (Right a) = Right a

f3 (Left a)  = Right a
f3 (Right a) = Left a

f4 (Left a)  = Left a
f4 (Right a) = Left a
```

R: Test the understanding of basic principles of parametricity.

---

Q: If you have
```
f1 :: a -> Int -> (a, Int)
f2 :: Int -> a -> (Int, a)
```

> What is the (most general / inferred) type of `[f1, f2]`? If you think it is
> a type error, explain why.
> 
> A: `[f1, f2] :: Int -> Int -> (Int, Int)`

Reviewer 2: I assumed this to be `f1` and `f2` in a list like `[f1,f2]`. Wasn't sure myself so I typechecked it and it does work but gives the type signature shown.

```suggestion
What is the (most general / inferred) type of `[f1, f2]`? If you think it is
a type error, explain why.

A: `[f1, f2] :: [Int -> Int -> (Int, Int)]`
```

Reviewer: The fact that we, the exam creators, got this one wrong (and the right answer wasn't immediately apparent to me either) makes me think that maybe it's a little too complicated for the basic track.

R: Tests basic reasoning capabilities about polymorphism and unification.

---

Q: If you have
```
f1 :: a   -> b -> (a, b)
f2 :: Int -> c
```
What is the (most general / inferred) type of `[f1, f2]`? If you think it is
a type error, explain why.

> A: `[f1, f2] :: Int -> b -> (Int, b)`

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
A: `[f1, f2] :: [Int -> b -> (Int, b)]`
```

Similar to above. (Taught me something new though)

Reviewer: Yeah, same comment here from me as well.  I get what the question is trying to accomplish, but lists of functions seem a little too contrived for my liking.  I wonder if we can come up with a simpler and more commonly used way of achieving the same thing.  Perhaps instead of putting the functions into a list we can make a third function that uses both of the first two?

R: Tests basic reasoning capabilities about polymorphism and unification.

---

> Q: What is the type of `map . map`?

Reviewer: This level of type complexity makes me want to shoot myself.  And in the real world I'd just get ghci to give it to me or perhaps ask lambdabot or something.  I do think we should test people's understanding of function composition, but I'd advocate something drop-dead simple.

> A: `map . map :: (a -> b) -> [[a]] -> [[b]]`

Reviewer 3: It might make sense for a more advanced section to have a question on parametricity like this:

> Consider a function with the following type and unknown implementation:
> 
> ```haskell
> f :: Int -> [(a, Int)] -> [a]
> ```
> 
> Is it always the case that for any input values `n :: Int`, `xs :: [(a, Int)]`, and `g :: a -> b` the following equality holds?
> 
> ```haskell
> map g (f n xs)  =  f n (map (\(x, y) -> (g x, y)) xs)
> ```
